---
layout: amc
---

<div class="problem">
    <h4>Problem:</h4>

    (a) Prove that given any $5$ integers, there exist three of them whose sum is divisible by $3.$

    (b) Prove that given any $17$ integers, there exist nine of them whose sum is divisible by $9.$

</div>

<div class="solution">
    <h4>Solution:</h4>
    a)
    <p>So we can think of this problem in terms of modular arithmetic. When an integer is divided by 3 it has
        the
        remainders of $0$, $1$, or $2.$ Hmm... using the Pigeonhole Principle here would be a good idea! We can
        think of the remainders $0,1,$ and $2$ as our "boxes". Our balls can be the $5$ integers. Since the
        number
        of balls is greater than the number of boxes, we can tell we are heading in the right direction.
    </p>
    <p>We can think of this problem like easy casework. Specifically, we will have 3 cases.
    </p>
    <p>
        $\textbf{Case 1: All remainders are present.}$
        We know that one integer has a remainder of $1$, another has a remainder of $2$, and another has a
        remainder of $3.$ So $3 + 2 + 1 \equiv 0 \mod{3}.$
    </p>
    <p>
        $\textbf{Case 2: Only 2 remainders are present.}$
        We know that there are only $2$ "boxes" present. To divide $5$ numbers into $2$ boxes, the Pigeonhole
        Principle can assist us. In at least one of the boxes, there must be at least $\left
        \lfloor{\frac{4}{2}}\right \rfloor + 1$ integers in one box. Since $3x \equiv 0 \mod {3}$ such that $x =
        0,1,$ or $2,$ we are done!P
    </p>
    <p>
        $\textbf{Case 3: Only 1 remainder is present.}$
        All of the $5$ integers have the same remainder. This guarantees that $3$ of them have the same
        remainder and are divisible by $3$ when you add them.
    </p>
    b)
    <p>
        So we can use part $(a)$ to help us here! Let's start off with a arbitrary group of $5$ integers. There
        are $3$ integers among them that sum to a multiple of $3.$ Let's say we take another $5$ integers. This
        means that we have $10$ integers with $2$ groups of $3$ integers such that their sums are a multiple of
        $3.$ Let's add another $5$ integers! Now we have $15$ integers with $3$ groups of $3$ integers each such
        that their sums are a multiple of $3.$
    </p>
    <p>We can also phrase this in such a way that if we have $15$ integers, there exist $9$ of them whose sum is
        divisible by $3.$ This is starting to look close to our original problem statement! Hmm.. now we have to
        somehow pick two more integers and raise the "sum is divisible by $3$" to $9.$ Well, the first thing to
        notice is that we actually have $9$ integers instead of $15$ integers so far (since we don't really care
        about the remaining $6$).
    </p>
    <p>
        This means that we have $8$ integers left to choose! Let's say we have a group of $8$ integers. We can
        split this into a group of $5$ integers and $3$ integers. In the group of $5$, we notice that there are
        $3$ integers among them whose sum is divisible by $3$ (reference to part $(a)$). Then in that group,
        there are $2$ integers we haven't used. We can combine these $2$ integers with our other group of $3$
        and make a new group of $5$! Among this new group we have yet another sum of $3$ integers. We can write
        this more neatly, $\text{2 groups of 3 whose sum is a multiple of 3 + 2 leftover integers}.$
    </p>
    <p>
        So far we have...
        $$\text{a group of 9 integers whose sum is divisible by 3 + 2 groups of 3 integers whose sum}$$
    <p>$$\text{is divisible by 3 each + 2 leftover integers.}$$</p>
    </p>
    <p>
        For the sake of simplicity we can split the group of $9$ integers back into $3$ groups of $3$ integers
        whose sum is divisible by $3.$
    </p>
    <p>
        Therefore we have, $\text{5 groups of 3 integers whose sum is a multiple of 3 each + 2 leftover integers.}$ It might be time to finally use the Pigeonhole Principle! The
        Pigeonhole principle involves both balls and boxes, so what would those be? Let's start with the boxes.
        It's probably best to show that $3$ of the $5$ groups of $3$ are divisible by $9$ when you add them up.
        Let $\text{x = the sum of three integers whose sum is divisible by 3.}$
    </p>
    <p>
        So we know that $x \equiv 0, 3,$ or $6$ $\mod {9}$ because we want $x - \text{some number} \equiv 0 \mod
        {9}$ to retain a
        factor of $3$ since it must have a factor of $9$. This gives us a major clue on what our balls and boxes
        could be! Our boxes could be the remainders $0,3, $ and $6.$ Our balls can be the $5$ groups of $3$
        integers. Our goal is to show that $3$ of these groups of $3$, when summed together, are divisible by
        $9!$ Visually, we can think of filling in the columns down below with $x'$s to signify the groups.
        Example shown down below.
    </p>
    <p>
        $$\begin{array}{c | c | c}
        & & \\ x & & \\ & x & x\\ & x & x \\ \hline 0 & 3 & 6
        \end{array}$$
    </p>
    <p>
        We can proceed with casework similar to that in part $(a).$
    </p>
    <p>
        $\textbf{Case 1: All remainders are present.}$
        This means that one group has a remainder of $0$, another has a remainder of $3$, and another has one of
        $6$ and we don't care about the other two groups. We know $6 + 3 + 0 \equiv 0 \mod {9}.$ Also meaning
        that $9$ integers out of $17$ sum to a multiple of $9. $
    </p>
    <p>
        $\textbf{Case 2: Only 2 remainders are present.}$
        If only $2$ remainders are present, then by the Pigeonhole Principle we have in at least one box we have
        at least $ \lfloor {\frac{4}{2}} \rfloor + 1 = 3$ groups. So there is at least $3$ of the same
        remainder. Since the remainders themselves are multiples of $3$ this creates a factor of $9.$
    </p>
    <p>
        $\textbf{Case 3: Only 1 remainder is present.}$
        If only $1$ remainder is present, then all $5$ integers have to have the same remainder. There are $3$
        integers among them that will also have the same remainder. Since the remainders are multiples of $3$,
        we create another factor of $3$ and we are done!
    </p>
    <p>
        Hence, we have just shown with casework that among $5$ groups of $3$, the sum of $3$ of those groups
        turn out to be a multiple of $9.$ We also have the $2$ leftover integers from our reasoning up above, so
        we do indeed have $17$ integers! Therefore we have shown that given any $17$ integers, there exist nine
        of them whose sum is divisible by $9.$
    </p>
</div>
