---
layout: post
title: "My Independent Research Journey: Dynamical Physics"
date: 2023-04-01
categories: research, synchronizing pendulums, physics
thumbnail: "/img/ptolemy.jpeg"
---

# My Independent Research Journey: Dynamical Physics

## By: Niyathi Kukkapalli

## Introduction

Independent research is actually quite common and it's how most prolific ISEF qualifers start their journey. In order to contact professors and attend summer programs, you need a resume of research. Professors are unlikely to take people with little experience, unless you've made the IMO or similar olympaids, but we are talking the majority of people here. 

## Finding a Topic 

The hardest step is always finding a suitable topic, then the data collection is a piece of cake. Although, how to find a topic? Well, if you are a high schooler you will probably want some level of complexity to your research. If in middle school, I would suggest looking on wesbites such as Science Buddies (https://www.sciencebuddies.org) which is a great website to branch off. 

Although, I found mine by searching through Youtube. Another way to get a topic, is to simply cold email a bunch of local professors who would be willing to supervise your project and give you ideas. Usually, this won't work so it's best to do a bunch of literature reviews. 

The best strategy is to take a well known problem and twist it in a unique way that no one has done. For example, my project dealt with synchronizing pendulums which was a common problem investigated by top schools like Harvard and UCLA. If you've touched classical mechanics, you've sure to have heard of it. I researched what has been done so far, and nothing regarding the properties of the pendulum on synchronization has been done. 

Hence, topic secured. Honestly, just reading it plainly, the topic doesn't sound super groundbreaking. But at least for high school research, 

## Performing the Data

## Writing a Report 

## Presenting at Science Fair 


